[dv/doc] Add sec_cm_dv_framework (#10708)
lowRISC/opentitan: doc/ug/sec_cm_dv_framework/index.md

---
title: "Security Countermeasure Verification Framework"
---

## Purpose

> In a security chip, there are many various hardening security countermeasures implemented in security blocks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a security chip, there are many hardening security countermeasures implemented in security blocks.
```

Hardened security countermeasures are used to detect attacks by embedding integrity checks.
Usually it can’t be triggered by software or toggling the pins on the chip.
So, this may need to be tested one by one via forcing internal design signals on the security countermeasure related logic, which mimics attackers to flip the circuit.
This kind of verification is needed but the effort could be tremendous.
The work can be significantly reduced by using a unified verification framework.

## Standardized Design Countermeasure Primitive
Each countermeasure is implemented as a primitive - an RTL design building block written in SystemVerilog.
The standardization of how these building blocks are designed paves the way for automated verification.

There are 2 requirements that are needed in this primitive.

> 1. Create a standard primitive for each kind of countermeasure, such as a security counter module, which can detect if the counter value is modified unintentionally.

Reviewer: This first sentence seems to repeat what you said above. Rework it?

These primitives could be reused across all blocks in the chip.
Each primitive has an error indicator as an IO (or an internal signal if other blocks don’t need to connect with this error indicator).
Once the design detects an attack, the error will be set.

![diagram_of_sec_cm_prim](diagram_of_sec_cm_prim.svg)

2. Once the error is set, the block should report a fatal alert or trigger unmasked interrupt to the system.

> There could be some other logics which are triggered when error occurs but not unified across the blocks.

Reviewer: "some other logics which are" -> "additional logic"?  Also, could you describe this in more detail? Or remove this mention? Perhaps you mean something along the line of custom additional logic, like cancelling some operations when errors occur.

![diagram_of_block_that_contains_sec_cm_primitive](diagram_of_block_that_contains_sec_cm_primitive.svg)

## Embedded Common Checks In The Design
At the top of each IP, an assertion check should be added to ensure that the fatal alert will be triggered once error is set.

> In the countermeasure primitive, there is another check to ensure that each instance of the countermeasure primitive always has this assertion check.

Reviewer: "always has this assertion check."... seems unclear, you mean something like "is connected to the fatal alert"?

Author: I actually mean the instance of prim contains the error-trigger-alert assertion check.
Reworded a bit.

`define ASSERT_PRIM_COUNT_ERROR_TRIGGER_ALERT(NAME_, PRIM_HIER_, ALERT_, MAX_CYCLES_ = 5) \
  NAME_: assert property (@(posedge clk)) disable iff(!rst_n) \
                ($rose(PRIM_HIER_.err_o) |-> ##[1:MAX_CYCLES_] $rose(ALERT_.alert_p)) \
  `ifdef SIM_OR_FPV \
  assign PRIM_HIER_.unused_assert_connected = 1'b1; \
  `endif

module prim_count();
  ...
  // This logic that will be assign to one, when user adds macro
  // ASSERT_PRIM_COUNT_ERROR_TRIGGER_ALERT to check the error with alert, in case that prim_count
  // is used in design without adding this assertion check.
  `ifdef SIM_OR_FPV \
  logic assert_connected;

  initial #0 assert(assert_connected === 1'b1);
  `endif
endmodule
```

Secondly, invoke the assertion macro for each instance of the countermeasure primitive in the IP top.

```systemverilog
module a_ip_top();
  ...
  // Invoke the assertion macro for each instance of the countermeasure primitive
  `ASSERT_PRIM_COUNT_ERROR_TRIGGER_ALERT(CtrlCntAlertCheck_A, u_ctrl.u_cnt, alert_tx_o[0])

  `ASSERT_PRIM_COUNT_ERROR_TRIGGER_ALERT(FsmCntAlertCheck_A, u_fsm.u_cnt, alert_tx_o[0])

endmodule

```

## Verification Framework For The Standardized Design Countermeasures

> This verification framework includes 3 types of verification works, which are all needed in order to acheive the completed verification for countermeasures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This verification framework involves three different steps, which are all needed in order to acheive the completed verification for countermeasures.
```
Or something like that? I find it is better to use a word for numbers in descriptions, and the sentence is repeating "verification *work*", which makes it weaker.

### Primitive-Level Verification
Use FPV or a simple simulation based testbench to verify the correctness of the error indicator as well as other functionality in the primitive.
This unit-level testing eases the verification work at the higher level.
Coverage closure for this primitive at higher-level can be eliminated.

### FPV Proves The Embedded Assertion
Use FPV to prove that the embedded assertion is true (fatal alert is triggered once error is set).
This mathematically proves that an error unconditionally leads to the fatal alert.

> ### Block-Level Verification With A Unified Semi-Automation Framework.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Block-Level Verification With A Unified Semi-Automated Framework
```

> Triggering the fatal alert is usually not the only outcome of detecting an attack. Some other behavior may occur as well, such as wiping all the internal secrets, invaliding new commands.

Reviewer: This and some of the next sentences seem repeated. I think you are describing some specific part of the implementation, so state that more clearly...

    endtask
  endclass

  prim_count_if_proxy if_proxy;
  initial begin
    if_proxy = new("if_proxy");
    if_proxy.sec_cm_type = sec_cm_pkg::SecCmPrimCount;
    if_proxy.prim_path = $sformatf("%m");
    sec_cm_pkg::sec_cm_if_proxy_q.push_back(if_proxy);
  end
```

3. In the base sequence, create a loop to test each instance of the countermeasure primitive. In each loop, “inject_fault” task from the proxy class will be invoked, which is followed by a “check_resp” task. The block owner can extend this sequence and add additional checks for non-standardized behavior based on the proxy_class info such as the hierarchy of the primitive instance.

```systemverilog
foreach (sec_cm_pkg::sec_cm_if_proxy_q[i]) begin
    sec_cm_pkg::sec_cm_base_if_proxy if_proxy = sec_cm_pkg::sec_cm_if_proxy_q[i];
    inject_fault(if_proxy));  // call if_proxy.inject_fault
    check_resp(if_proxy);
end
```
This automation essentially relies on standardizing design countermeasure primitives.
It uses the primitive types to anchor all the instances of countermeasure primitives and store all the handles that associate to the interface of the countermeasure primitive in a global location.

> The framework loops all the handles and provides a common sequence to check common behavior as well as callback functions that allow users to test the non-standard logics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The framework loops over all the handles and provides a common sequence to check common behavior as well as callback functions that allow users to test any non-standard behavior.
```
